# Simple

Perhaps the biggest challenge in programming is to make and keep things simple.
Simplicity is key in making reliable, maintainable, and efficient software.

Creating new functionality usually means that you make things more complicated.
It is a good idea to balance periods of increasing complexity with periods of simplification.

Striving for simplicity has many benefits, as simpler code is:
- Easier to understand
- Easier to debug
- Easier to measure
- Easier to optimize
- Less likely to contain bugs

Simplification in software can take many forms:
- Reducing redundant code
- Simplifying boolean logic
- Deciding not to deal with certain edge cases
- Letting a human handle certain cases manually
- Buying existing software
- Choosing boring but mature technology

Requirements often don't take into account that it's not always easy to automate something.
Sometimes, handling the final 5% of cases takes 95% of the development time.
The longer it takes to develop something, the more likely it is to contain bugs.
Is it then still a good idea to write code, or can we think of a better way to spend our time?

As soon as you have a working solution, it's a good idea to start simplifying immediately.
The problem is still fresh in your mind and it is easier to see what might be simplified.

Failing to take the time to simplify means incurring technical debt.
This means it will be more costly to fix an issue than when you had spent time simplifying.

Making things simple is very hard but it is also very satisfying.
It is one of my favourite things about programming.
